# Pitest (PIT)

[Pitest](https://github.com/hcoles/pitest) is a mutation testing framework for Java. It is supported by all Marv
versions `1.0.0+`.

## Contents

* [Running Pitest](#running-pitest)
* [Getting Started With Pitest In Marv](#getting-started-with-pitest-in-marv)
* [Decompilers](#decompilers)
* [Source Code Mutation Formatting](#source-code-mutation-formatting)

## Running Pitest

Pitest must be run with the `-Dfeatures="+EXPORT"` flag which exports the mutated class files. This is required because
Marv will decompile these class files to construct each mutants replacement string.

```cli
mvn org.pitest:pitest-maven:mutationCoverage -Dfeatures="+EXPORT"
```

## Getting Started With Pitest In Marv

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Marv has to decompile the source code mutations to display results from Pitest. Please ensure you
have read [Running Pitest](#running-pitest) and have at least one of the decompilers listed in the
[Decompilers](#decompilers) section installed and have the `MARV_LIB_PATH` environment variable set.

1. To get started with Pitest in Marv, run the `marv init` command to generate the required `.marv.yml`
   configuration file.

```terminaloutput
marv init -f Pitest
```

2. Edit the field under the `pitest` section in the `.marv.yml` file to point at the relevant locations.
   An example is shown below:

```yaml
# Enable the pitest framework
pitest:
    # The relative path to the mutations.xml file generated by pitest.
    xml-path: mutations.xml
    
    # The relative path to the source code directory.
    src-code-path: src
    
    # The relative path to the source (originally compiled) class files
    # that contain no mutations.
    src-class-path: target/classes
    
    # The relative path to the mutated class files exported by pitest.
    mut-class-path: target/pit-reports/export
    
    # Set which decompiler Marv should use to retrieve the source code mutation.
    # Must be one of [vfserver, vineflower, garlic]
    decompiler: vfserver
```

3. Run the `marv` command to launch Marv and click the localhost URL to open the Marv interface. Depending on the number
of mutations, choice of decompiler and available processing power, this process could take several minutes.

```terminaloutput
marv
```

## Decompilers

Marv has a range of decompiler options that can be used with to construct the Pitest mutant replacement strings. They
are listed below.

> [!CAUTION]
> The `garlic` decompiler is currently unstable and using it could cause some mutants to be skipped due to a
> segmentation fault that occurs when running `garlic` on some class files.

* [vineflower-server](https://github.com/SecretSheppy/vineflower-server) (recommended)
* [vineflower](https://github.com/Vineflower/vineflower)
* [garlic](https://github.com/neocanable/garlic)

For installation location see [Installation - Libraries](../../README.md#libraries)

## Source Code Mutation Formatting

The replacement strings (inserted lines) that Marv produces are correct; however, they are occasionally flanked by
incorrectly formatted deleted lines due to formatting differences between the source code and decompiled class code.
